DRACULA by Bram Stoker
Chapter 9
Letter
Mina Harker to Lucy Westenra, Budapest, 24 August
My dearest Lucy, I know you will be anxious to hear all that has happened since we parted at the railway station at Whitby.
Well, my dear, I got to Hull all right and caught the boat to Hamburg and then the train on here.
I feel that I can hardly recall anything of the journey, except that I knew I was coming to Jonathan, and that as I should have to do some nursing, I had better get all the sleep I could.
I found my dear one, oh so thin and pale and weak looking.
All the resolution has gone out of his dear eyes, and that quiet dignity which I told you was in his face has vanished.
He is only a wreck of himself, and he does not remember anything that has happened to him for a long time past.
At least he wants me to believe so, and I shall never ask.
He has had some terrible shock, and I fear it might tax his poor brain if he were to try to recall it.
Sister Agatha, who is a good creature and a born nurse, tells me that he wanted her to tell me what they were.
She would only cross herself and say she would never tell, that the ravings of the sick were the secrets of God, and that if a nurse through her vocation should hear them, she should respect her trust.
She is a sweet, good soul, and the next day when she saw I was troubled, she opened up the subject my poor dear raved about, added,
I can tell you this much my dear, that it was not about anything which he has done wrong himself, and you as his wife-to-be have no cause to be concerned.
He has not forgotten you, or what he owes to you. His fear was of great and terrible things which no mortal can treat of.
I do believe the dear soul thought I might be jealous lest my poor dear should have fallen in love with any other girl.
The idea of my being jealous about Jonathan, and yet my dear let me whisper I felt a thrill of joy through me when I knew that no other woman was cause for trouble.
I am now sitting by his bedside where I can see his face while he sleeps. He is waking.
When he woke he asked me for his coat as he wanted to get me something from the pocket. I asked Sister Agatha and she brought all his things.
I saw amongst them was his notebook. I was going to ask him to let me look at it, for I knew that I might find some clue to his trouble.
But I suppose he must have seen my wish in my eyes, for he sent me over to the window, saying he wanted to be quite alone for a moment.
Then he called me back and he said to me very solemnly, Wilhelmina.
I knew then that he was in deadly earnest, for he has never called me by that name since he asked me to marry him.
You know dear, my ideas of the trust between husband and wife, there should be no secret, no concealment.
I have had a great shock and when I try to think of what it is I feel my head spin round and I do not know if it was real or the dreaming of the madman.
You know I had brain fever and that is to be mad. The secret is here and I do not want to know it.
I want to take up my life here, with our marriage. For, my dear, we had decided to be married as soon as the formalities are complete.
Are you willing, Wilhelmina, to share my ignorance? Here is the book. Take it and keep it. Read it if you will, but never let me know unless, indeed, some solemn duty should come upon me to go back to the bitter hours, asleep or awake, sane or mad, recorded here.
He fell back exhausted and I put the book under his pillow and kissed him. I have asked sister Agatha to beg the superior to let our wedding be this afternoon and am waiting her reply.
She has come and told me that the chaplain of the English mission church has been sent for. We are to be married in an hour or as soon after as Jonathan awakes.
Lucy, the time has come and gone. I feel very solemn but very, very happy.
Jonathan woke a little after the hour and all was ready and he sat up in bed propped up with pillows.
He answered his I will firmly and strong. I could hardly speak. My heart was so full that even those words seemed to choke me.
The dear sisters were so kind. Please, God, I shall never, never forget them, nor the grave and sweet responsibilities I have taken upon me.
I must tell you of my wedding present when the chaplain and the sisters had left me alone with my husband.
Oh, Lucy, it is the first time I have written the words my husband left me alone with my husband.
I took the book from under his pillow and wrapped it up in white paper and tied it with a little bit of pale blue ribbon which was round my neck
and sealed it over the knot with sealing wax and for my seal I used my wedding ring.
Then I kissed it and showed it to my husband and told him that I would keep it so
and then it would be an outward and visible sign for us all our lives that we trusted each other
that I would never open it unless it were for his own dear's sake or for the sake of some stern duty.
Then he took my hand in his and, oh, Lucy, it was the first time he took his wife's hand
and said that it was the dearest thing in all the wide world and that he would go through all the past again to win it if need be.
The poor dear meant to have set a part of the past but he cannot think of time yet
and I shall not wonder if at first he mixes up not only the month but the year.
Well, my dear, what could I say? I could only tell him that I was the happiest woman in all the wide world
and that I had nothing to give him except myself, my life, and my trust
and that with these went my love and duty for all the days of my life.
And, my dear, when he kissed me and drew me to him with his poor weak hands, it was like a solemn pledge between us.
Lucy, dear, do you know why I tell you all this? It is not only because it is all sweet to me
but because you have been and are very dear to me.
It was my privilege to be your friend and guide you when you came from the schoolroom to prepare for the world of life.
I want you to see now, and with the eyes of a very happy wife, whether duty has led me
so that in your own married life you too may be all happy as I am.
My dear, please, Almighty God, your life, may it be all it promises.
A long day of sunshine with no harsh wind, no forgetting duty, no distrust.
I must not wish you no pain, for that can never be, but I do hope you will always be as happy as I am now.
Good-bye, my dear. I shall post this at once and perhaps write you very soon again.
I must stop, for Jonathan is waking. I must attend my husband.
Your ever-loving, Mina Harker
Letter
Lucy Westenra to Mina Harker
Whitby, 30 August
My dearest Mina, oceans of love and millions of kisses, and may you soon be in your own home with your husband.
I wish you were coming home soon enough to stay with us here.
The strong air would soon restore Jonathan. It has quite restored me.
I have an appetite like a cormorant. I am full of life and sleep well.
You'll be glad to know that I have quite given up walking in my sleep. I think I have not stirred out of my bed for a week.
That is when I once get into it at night.
Arthur says I am getting fat.
By the way, I forgot to tell you that Arthur is here.
We have such walks and drives and rides and rowing and tennis and fishing together, and I love him more than ever.
He tells me that he loves me more, but I doubt that, for at first he told me that he couldn't love me more than he did then.
But this is nonsense.
There he is calling to me, so no more just at present, from your loving Lucy.
P.S. Mother sends her love. She seems better, poor dear.
P.P.S. We are to be married on 28 September.
Dr. Seward's Diary
20 August
The case of Renfield grows even more interesting.
He is now so far quiet that there are spells of cessation from his passion.
For the first week after his attack he was perpetually violent.
Then one night, just as the moon rose, he grew quiet and kept murmuring to himself.
Now I can wait. Now I can wait.
The attendant came to tell me, so I ran down at once to have a look at him.
He was still in the straight waistcoat and in the padded room,
but the suffused look has gone from his face and his eyes had something of their old pleading.
I might almost say cringing softness.
I was satisfied with his present condition and directed him to be relieved.
The attendants hesitated, but finally carried out my wishes without protest.
It was a strange thing that the patient had humour enough to see their distrust,
for, coming close to me, he said in a whisper, all the while looking furtively at them,
they think I could hurt you, fancy me hurting you, the fools.
It was soothing somehow to the feelings to find myself disassociated
even in the mind of this poor madman from the others.
But all the same I could not follow his thought.
Am I to take it that I have anything in common with him, so that we are, as it were, to stand together?
Or has he to gain from me some good so stupendous that my well-being is needful to him?
I must find out later on.
Tonight he will not speak.
Even the offer of a kitten or even a full-grown cat will not tempt him.
He will only say, I don't take any stock in cats.
I have more to think of now, and I can wait, I can wait.
After a while I left him.
The attendant tells me that he was quiet until just before dawn,
and that then he began to get uneasy, and at length violent,
until at last he fell into a paroxysm which exhausted him,
so that he swooned into a sort of coma.
Three nights has the same thing happened.
Violent all day, then quiet from moonrise to sunrise.
I wish I could get some clue to the cause.
It would almost seem as if there was some influence which came and went.
Happy thought.
We shall tonight play sane wits against mad ones.
He escaped before without our help.
Tonight he shall escape with it.
We shall give him a chance and have the men ready to follow in case they are required.
23rd August
The expected always happens.
How well does Rayleigh knew life.
Our bird when he found the cage open would not fly,
so all our subtle arrangements were for naught.
At any rate we have proved one thing,
that the spells of quietness last a reasonable time.
We shall in future be able to ease his bonds for a few hours each day.
I have given orders to the night attendant merely to shut him in the padded room
and once he is quiet, until the hour before sunrise.
The poor soul's body will enjoy the relief even if his mind cannot appreciate it.
Hark! the unexpected again, I am called.
Patient has once more escaped.
Later.
Another night adventure.
Renfield artfully waited until the attendant was entering the room to inspect.
Then he dashed out past him and flew down the passage.
I sent word for the attendants to follow.
Again he went into the grounds of the deserted house
and we found him in the same place pressed against the old chapel door.
When he saw me he became furious
and had not the attendant seized him in time he would have tried to kill me.
As we were holding him a strange thing happened.
He suddenly redoubled his efforts
and then as suddenly grew calm.
I looked round instinctively but could see nothing.
Then I caught the patient's eye and followed it
but could trace nothing as it looked into the moonlight sky
except a big bat which was flapping its silent and ghostly way to the west.
Bats usually wheel about but this one seemed to go straight on
as if it knew where it was bound for or had some intention of its own.
The patient grew calmer every instant and presently said,
You needn't tie me. I shall go quietly.
Without trouble we came back to the house.
I feel that there is something ominous in his calm and shall not forget this night.
Lucy with Stenra's Diary.
Hillingham 24 August.
I must imitate Mina and keep writing things down.
Then we can have long talks when we do meet.
I wonder when it will be.
I wish she were with me again for I feel so unhappy.
Last night I seemed to be dreaming again just as I was at Whitby.
Perhaps it is the change of air or getting home again.
It is all dark and horrid to me for I can remember nothing
but I am full of vague fear and I feel so weak and worn out.
When Arthur came to lunch he looked quite grieved when he saw me
and I had in the spirit to try to be cheerful.
I wonder if I could sleep in mother's room tonight.
I shall make an excuse to try.
25 August.
Another bad night.
Mother Nut seemed to take to my proposal.
She seems not too well herself and doubtless she fears to worry me.
I tried to keep awake and succeeded for a while
but when the clock struck twelve it waked me from a doze
so I must have been falling asleep.
There was a sort of scratching or flapping at the window
but I did not mind it and as I remember no more
I suppose I must have fallen asleep.
More bad dreams.
I wish I could remember them.
This morning I am horribly weak.
My face is ghastly pale and my throat pains me.
It must be something wrong with my lungs
for I don't seem to be getting air enough.
I shall try to cheer up when Arthur comes
or else I know he will be miserable to see me so.
Letter.
Arthur to Dr. Seward.
Albemarle Hotel.
31 August.
My dear Jack, I want you to do me a favour.
Lucy is ill.
That is she has no special disease
but she looks awful and is getting worse every day.
I have asked her if there is any cause.
I do not dare to ask her mother
for to disturb the poor lady's mind about her daughter
and her present state of health would be fatal.
Mrs. Westenra has confided to me that her doom is spoken.
Disease of the heart.
The poor Lucy does not know it yet.
I am sure that there is something praying
on my dear girl's mind.
I am almost distracted when I think of her.
To look at her gives me a pang.
I told her I should ask you to see her
and though she demurred at first
I know why, old fellow, she finally consented.
It will be a painful task for you, I know, old friend,
but it is for her sake and I must not hesitate to ask
or you to act.
You are to come at lunch at Hilling tomorrow.
Two o'clock, so as not to arouse any suspicion
of Mrs. Westenra.
And after lunch Lucy will take an opportunity
of being alone with you.
I am filled with anxiety and I want to consult with you
alone as soon as I can after you have seen her.
Do not fail.
Arthur
TELEGRAM
Arthur Holmwood to Seward
1 September
I am summoned to see my father,
who is worse.
I am writing. Write me fully by tonight's post
to ring.
Wire me if necessary.
Letter
from Dr. Seward to Arthur Holmwood
2 September
My dear old fellow,
with regard to Mrs. Westenra's health
I hasten to let you know at once
that in my opinion there is not any functional disturbance
or any malady that I know of.
At the same time I am not by any means satisfied
with her appearance.
She is woefully different from what she was
when I saw her last.
Of course you must bear in mind
that I have not had the full opportunity of examination
such as I should wish.
Our very friendship makes a little difficulty
which not even medicinal science or custom
can bridge over.
I had better tell you exactly what happened,
leaving you to draw, in a measure, your own conclusions.
I shall then say what I have done
and propose doing.
I found Mrs. Westenra in seemingly gay spirits.
Her mother was present
and in a few seconds I made up my mind
that she was trying all she knew to mislead her mother
and prevent her from being anxious.
I have no doubt she guesses if she does not know
what need of caution there is.
We lunched alone
and as we all exerted ourselves to be
cheerful we got, as some kind of reward
for our labors, some real cheerfulness
amongst us.
Then Mrs. Westenra went to lie down
and Lucy was left with me.
We went into her boudoir.
Until we got there her gaiety remained
for the servants were coming and going.
As soon as the door was closed however
the mask fell from her face
and she sunk down into a chair with a great sigh
and hid her eyes with her hand.
When I saw that her high spirits had
failed I at once took advantage of her
reaction to make a diagnosis.
She said to me very sweetly,
I cannot tell you how I loathe
talking about myself.
I reminded her that a doctor's confidence was sacred
but that you were grievously anxious
about her. She caught on
to my meaning at once and settled that matter
in a word. Tell author
everything you choose. I do not care
for myself but for him
so I am quite free.
I could easily see that she was somewhat
bloodless but I could not see the usual
anemic signs and by the chance
I was able to test the actual quality
of her blood. For an opening
of the window which was stiff a cord
gave way and she cut her hands
slightly with broken glass.
It was a slight matter in itself but it
gave me an evident chance and I secured
a few drops of the blood and have analyzed
them. The qualitative analysis
gave a quite normal condition
and shows I should infer
in itself a vigorous state of health.
In other physical matters
I was quite satisfied that there is no need
for anxiety but as there must be
a cause somewhere I have come to the conclusion
that it must be something mental.
She complains of difficulty
breathing satisfactorily at times
and of heavy lethargic
sleep with dreams that frighten
her but regarding which
she can remember nothing. She says
that as a child she used to walk in her sleep
and that when in Whitby the habit came back
and that once she
walked out in the night and went out to Eastcliff
where Miss Murray found her. But
she assures me that of late that habit has not
returned.
I am in doubt and so have done the best
thing I know of. I have written to
my old friend and master, Professor
Van Helsing of Amsterdam
who knows as much about obscure diseases
as anyone in the world. I have asked
him to come over and as you told me that
all things were to be at your charge I have mentioned
to him who you are and your relation to
Miss Westenra. This my dear
fellow is an obedience to your wishes for I
am only too proud and happy to do anything
I can for her.
Van Helsing would I know
do anything for me for a personal
reason so no matter on what ground he
comes we must accept his wishes.
He is a seemingly arbitrary man
this is because he knows what he is talking
about better than anyone else.
He is a philosopher and a metaphysician
and one of the most advanced scientists
of its day and he has I believe
an absolutely open mind.
This with an iron nerve a temper
of the ice brook and indomitable
resolution, self command and
toleration exalted from virtues to
blessings and the kindliest
and truest heart that beats.
He is from his equipment for the noble
work that he is doing for mankind
work both in theory and practice
for his views are as wide as his
all embracing sympathy.
I tell you these facts that you may know why
I have such confidence in him.
I have asked him to come at once.
I shall see Miss Westenra tomorrow again.
She is to meet me at the stores
so that I may not alarm her mother by too early
a repetition of my call.
Yours always
John Seward
Letter
Abraham Van Helsing
M.D. D.P.H.
D.L.I.T. etc.
To Dr. Seward
2. September
My good friend,
when I received your letter I am already
coming to you. By good fortune I can
leave just as once without wrong to
any of those who have trusted me.
Were fortune other, then it were bad
for those who have trusted, for I come to my
friend when he call me to aid those he holds
dear. Tell your friend that
when time you suck from my wound so swiftly
the poison of the gangrene from that knife
that our other friend too nervous let slip
you did more for him when he wants my aids
and you call for them than all his great
fortune could do. But it is pleasure
added to do for him, your friend,
it is you that I come.
Have near at hand and please
it so arranged that we see the young lady
not too late on tomorrow, for it is likely
that I may have to return here that night.
But if need be I shall come again
in three days and stay longer if it must.
Till then, good-bye,
my friend John.
Van Helsing
Letters
Letter
Dr. Stuart to Hon. Arthur Holmwood
3. September
My dear Art,
Van Helsing is come and gone.
He came on with me to Hillingham and
found that by Lucy's discretion her mother
was lunching out so that we were alone with her.
Van Helsing made a very careful
examination of the patient.
He is to report to me and I shall
advise you, for of course I was not
present all the time.
He is, I fear, much concerned,
but says he must think. When I told
him of our friendship and how you trust me
in the matter, he said, you must tell him
all you think. Tell him, him,
what I think, if you can guess it, if you will.
Nay, I am not jesting.
There is no jest, but life and death,
perhaps more.
I asked what he meant by that, for he was very
serious. This was when we had come back
to town and he was having a cup of tea
before starting on his return to Amsterdam.
He would not give me any further
clue. You must not be angry with me,
Art, because his very reticence
means that all his brains are working for her
good. He will speak plainly enough
when the time comes, be sure.
So I told him I would simply write an account
of our visit, just as if I were doing
a descriptive special article for the Daily
Telegraph. He seemed not to
notice, but remarked that the smuts of London
were not quite so bad as they used to be when he
was a student here. I am to
get his report tomorrow if he can possibly
make it. In any case, I am to have
a letter.
Well, as to the visit, Lucy
was more cheerful than on the day I first
saw her, and certainly looked better.
She had lost something of the ghastly look
that so upset you, and her breathing was normal.
She was very sweet to the Professor,
as she always is, and tried
to make him feel at ease, though I could see
the poor girl was making a hard struggle for it.
I believe Van Helsing
saw it too, for I saw the quick
look under his bushy brows that I knew
of old. Then he began to chat of
all things except ourselves and diseases,
and with such an infinite geniality
that I could see poor Lucy's pretense
of animation merge into reality.
Then, without any seeming change,
he brought the conversation gently round
to his visit, and suavely said,
My dear young Miss, I have the so
great pleasure because you are so much
beloved. That is much, my dear.
Even there, that which I did not
see. They told me you were down
in the spirit, and that you were of a ghastly
tale. To them I say poof,
and he snapped his fingers at me
and went on. But you and I shall
show them how wrong they are. How
can he, and he pointed at me with the same
look and gesture as that which he pointed me
out in his class, on and rather
after a particular occasion which he never
fails to remind me of, know
anything of a young lady's.
He had his mad men to play with and to bring
them back to happiness, and to those
that love them. It is much to do,
and oh, but there are rewards in that we can bestow
such happiness. But the young ladies,
he has no wife nor daughter,
and the young do not tell themselves to the young,
but to the old, like me, who have known
so many sorrows and the causes of them.
So, my dear, we will send him away
to smoke the cigarette in the garden, whilst
you and I have a little talk all to ourselves.
I took the hint
and strolled about, and presently the professor
came to the window and called me in.
He looked grave, but said,
I have made careful examination, but
there is no functional cause. With
you I agree that there has been much blood
lost. It has been,
but is not. But the conditions of her
are in no way anemic. I have asked
her to send me her maid, that I may ask just one
or two questions, that so I may not chance
to miss nothing. I know well
what she will say, and yet there is cause.
There is always cause for
everything. I must go back home and think.
You must send me the telegram every
day, and if there is nothing because, I shall come
again. The disease, for not to be
well as the disease, interests me,
and the sweet, young dear, she interests
me too. She charmed me,
and for her?
It is not for you or disease, I come.
As I tell you,
he would not say a word more, even when we
were alone, and so now, Art, you
know all I know. I shall keep stern
watch. I trust your poor
father is rallying. It must be a
terrible thing to you, my dear fellow, to be
placed in such a position between two people
who are both so dear to you.
I know your idea of duty to your father, and
you are right to stick to it. But if need be,
I shall send you word to come at once to Lucy,
so not be overanxious unless you
hear from me.
Dr. Seward's
Diary
4 September
Zufiga's patient still keeps up our interest
in him. He had only one outburst,
and that was yesterday, at an unusual
time. Just before the stroke of noon,
he began to grow restless.
The attendant knew the symptoms, and at once
summoned aid. Fortunately,
the men came at a run, and were just in time,
for at the stroke of noon he became so
violent that it took all their strength to hold
him. In about five minutes, however,
he began to get more quiet, and finally
sank into a sort of melancholy, in
which state he has remained up to now.
The attendant tells me that his
screams while in the paroxysm
were really appalling. I found
my hands full when I got in, attending
to some of the other patients who were frightened
by him. Indeed, I can quite understand
the effect, for the sounds disturbed
even me, though I was some distance away.
It is now after the dinner hour
of the asylum, and as yet my patient
sits in a corner brooding with a
dull, sullen, woe-begone look
in his face, which seems rather to
indicate than to show something directly.
I cannot quite understand it.
Later.
Another change in my patient.
At five o'clock I looked in on him
and found him seemingly as happy and contented
as he used to be. He was
catching flies and eating them, and was keeping
note of his capture by making nail marks
on the edge of the door between the ridges of
padding. When he saw me he
came over and apologized for his bad
conduct and asked me in a very humble,
cringing way to be led back to his own room
and to have his notebook again.
I thought it well to humor him,
so he is back in his room with the window open.
He has the sugar of his tea
spread out on the windowsill and is
reaping quite a harvest of flies.
He is not now eating them, but
putting them into a box as of old,
and is already examining the corners of his room
to find a spider.
I tried to get him to talk about the past
few days, for any clue to his thoughts would be
of an immense help to me, but he would not
rise. For a moment or two
he looked very sad and said in a sort
of far away voice as though saying it
rather to himself than to me.
All over, all over,
he has deserted me.
No hope for me now unless I do it
myself. Then suddenly
turning to me in a resolute way he
said, Doctor, won't you be
very good to me and let me have a little
more sugar? I think it would be very
good for me. And the
flies, I said.
Yes, the flies like it too,
and I like the flies, therefore
I like it. And there are
people who know so little as to think
that madmen do not argue.
I procured him a double supply and
left him as happy as a man, I suppose,
any in the world.
I wish I could fathom his
mind. Midnight,
another change in him,
I have been to see Miss
Westernera whom I found much better
and has just returned, and was standing
at our own gate looking at the sunset
when once more I heard him yelling.
As his room is on the other side of the
house I could bear it better in the morning.
It was a shock to me to turn from
the wonderful smoky beauty of a
sunset over London with its lurid
lights and inky shadows and all the
marvellous tints that come on foul
clouds, even as on foul water,
and to realise all the grim
sternness of my own cold stone
building with its wealth of
breathing misery and my own
desolate heart to endure it all.
I reached him just as the sun was
going down and from his window saw
the red disc sink.
As it sank he became less and less
frenzied and just as it dipped he
slid from the hands that held him
an inert mass on the floor.
It is wonderful, however,
with intellectual recubative power
lunatics have for within a few
minutes he stood up quite calmly and
looked around him. I signalled to
the attendants not to hold him for I was
anxious to see what he would do.
He went straight over to the window and
brushed out the crumbs of sugar.
Then he took his fly box and emptied it
outside and threw away the box.
Then he shut the window and crossing
over sat down on his bed.
All this surprised me so I asked him
Are you going to keep
flies anymore?
No, said he.
I am sick of all that rubbish.
He certainly is a wonderfully
interesting study.
I wish I could get some glimpse of his mind
or of the cause of his sudden passion.
Stop. There may be a clue
after all if we can find why today
his paroxysms came on at
high noon and at sunset.
Can it be that there is a malign influence
of the sun at periods which affect
certain natures as at times
the moon does others?
We shall see.
TELEGRAM SEWARD
LONDON
to Van Helsing, Amsterdam
6 September
Terrible change for the worse.
Come at once. Do not lose an hour.
I hold over Telegram to Holmwood till I've seen you.
PISKED WEST
PRINCE SEWARD ISLAND